Hey, YouTube. Hey, Bob.
>> Hey, Mike. How are you doing?
>> I'm fantastic. Awesome to have you here on the channel.
And in just a moment on Talk Python.
So shall we kick this thing off?
>> Yeah. Thanks for having me.
I'm glad to be back.
>> Yeah. Glad to have you back.
Let's just prefix this with thank you for those who are watching live.
If you've got comments, questions, please put them in the live chat.
We'll try to make them part of the show.
If you're watching later, I really appreciate you being here as well.
But you know, we don't have time travel, so no going back for questions there.
All right, Bob, you ready?
Yeah, let's do it.
Bob, welcome back to Talk Python to Me.
Thanks for having me back.
I'm excited to be here.
Yeah, it's really good to have you back.
You've been on a couple of times.
We started, I believe our first discussion on the show way back when was around 100 days of code.
We went on quite the 100 days of code journey,
writing a couple of really, really long courses
that were well-received, but it took a long,
like nine months for us to write, which was amazing.
And we're back together.
It's great to catch up.
- Yeah, indeed.
Yeah, that goes way back to 100 days of Python
and two courses that came from it.
- Yeah.
- Later, I think we also did a Django episode.
Yeah.
- That's right.
We did do a Django episode as well.
Good stuff.
So this time we're back to talk about code quality,
writing clean code, what are some of the tools
and also what are some of the techniques,
maybe even mindset people are using
to help them write clean code, better code,
both for yourself to make yourself happy
and as well to be a better teammate
if you're working in a team, right?
- Yeah, no, this topic really excites me.
It's in my everyday work
and I think there's a lot to gain from it.
So yeah, excited to share today.
- I am too.
It's something I really, really care a lot about.
It's one of those topics that I think is long lived,
which is rare in software development, right?
It's not the latest JavaScript framework
or something that's gonna last for a year or two.
These ideas are the kind of ideas that just,
no matter what you're doing,
even if you don't do Python, if you do something else,
it's very likely that these are solid foundations.
Some of the ideas will be specifically for Python,
but many of them not.
- Yeah, timeless stuff.
- Yeah, those are the good ones
that are worth putting your time into learning.
Now, before we jump into that topic,
which is gonna be good,
maybe just tell people what tripped you.
- These days, so I left Oracle a while back.
I think we spoke about that in 2020.
So I've been working on PyBytes full-time
for almost three years.
- Congratulations.
I know you and I spoke about this beforehand
and it was a really a big step for you.
- It was.
- Something you were absolutely looking forward to,
but just walking away from a good paying job, that's scary.
So congratulations.
- Yeah, thanks.
Yeah, and this is also around the time
that as PyBytes we pivoted to doing coaching.
So helping people one-on-one,
we created our PyBites Developer Mindset Program,
12-week coaching program, and that really took off.
And we have worked now with 100 plus people
And it's what I'm super excited about every day
when I wake up, because helping people,
overcoming the tutorial paralysis,
embracing imposter syndrome,
helping them shipping two projects end to end
is just the best thing ever.
- Yeah, to see people grow and become more confident
and get better.
And yeah, it's really, it's excellent work, isn't it?
- Yeah, it's really fulfilling.
- Yeah.
So congratulations.
It's awesome to hear that you're doing that now
and you can put all of your energy,
not just your side hustle energy
into these types of things,
which I can tell you, it feels real good.
- You know how it is, right?
- I do, I do.
I've been in it for a while.
Very fortunate.
Okay, so let's start this.
I was gonna start this off with looking at your article,
but before we do,
Toon Army Captain has a really great way
to sort of kick off this topic, I believe.
Clean code has less or fewer WTFs per line.
How about that?
- Nice.
- So yeah, I think that's gonna be a theme here.
Let's go ahead and jump into it.
I reached out to you and said,
"Hey, let's get together and talk about this."
Because I knew that you were passionate about these things.
But then you also put together a blog post here
called "Tips for Clean Code in Python."
I thought, "Okay, that's interesting."
Let me start flipping through here.
and there's just a bunch of nice ideas
that resonate with me.
So what I thought we could do is maybe you could set
the stage, like what the heck is clean code?
Toon Army did do a pretty good job
of kind of giving us the colloquial term,
but maybe something a little more safe,
or conformal we could go with.
Set the stage for what is clean code?
Why does it matter?
And then we could dive into some of the stuff
you put into your article,
and then also you and I both threw some ideas in
after, like to kind of expand it as well.
So let's start with what is this clean code thing?
- Yeah, to set off the stage.
So clean code is really when you write code
that's easier to maintain, easier to test,
easier to update, because as we all know,
a project usually starts simple,
but over time it grows, new requirements comes in,
you constantly have to change things.
And yeah, the cleanness of your code
will definitely determine how easy you can move a project forward, how you can make changes.
And of course, it's also a contribution to your team to make it a more pleasant experience
and decrease the amount of WTFs.
Yeah, you don't want to have fewer, the better.
Although maybe you'll even want to, just for a good war story at a conference five years
from now, but you don't want too many of those.
- Yeah, I think, yeah, to me, it's appreciating the fact
that if you do a good job,
what you're building will live a long time, right?
It will possibly be still the main focus
in five years from now.
And you don't always know what that's gonna be, right?
It could be, oh, here's a little side project.
It's just gonna pull in some data and like, you know,
you show it to somebody at work and like, you know what?
That's great, ship it.
Like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, ship it.
No, no, I just threw it together.
It's good, let's go, we're in a hurry.
And then that just starts to build and layer on
like a sediment that just makes it harder
and less fun to work with.
And so as you just think about,
this thing is small now, but as it grows,
what are both the practices
and maybe technological programming things
to bring and put in place so that as it grows,
you don't start to just really come to a screeching halt
to make changes, tests start to fail randomly
as you just touch it in various places,
things like that, right?
- Yeah, it was also kind of my introduction
to Python in 2012, so almost 11 years ago
when I made this automation framework at work.
And I was a big fan of Perl back then.
I guess that goes back to my Unix shell scripting
initial programming exploration.
And it was not maintainable at all, right?
There were no classes in Perl and it was just a mess.
Also, of course, because I didn't know Perl maybe very well.
But then I discovered Python and I could refactor it,
make it more modular.
And that project was then just a joy to work with.
And maybe that says a lot about Python as well,
that it does inherently things well,
because if you type import this in the REPL
and you get the scent of Python,
a lot of these statements sound so simple,
that they're actually so profound
and they actually tell you a lot about writing clean code
in a sense.
So anyway, but I agree.
- They also talk a lot about the community
that cares enough that, you know,
you have these sorts of commands in the language itself
that remind you to think about writing clean code.
And going way back to the late 80s,
Guido when he came up with it,
really broke with tradition to use white space
for the code structure.
And I think it's a little bit less so now,
but back then that was very much to encourage people
to write code in a way that was very readable.
Whereas, I say less so than now,
because you've got a lot of IDEs and stuff
where you can push a button,
and it'll auto format it,
and you've got things like black.
And if you had curly braces,
it could still be quickly put into a pretty shape now.
But in the early days,
that was a really important concept of it.
These days we're spoiled, right?
Having black out of formatting and all that.
We started, that was not the case.
How, how did you react to the white space?
I think, I just really didn't like it.
I thought this is just weird.
Like, okay.
Everything else about this language seems pretty nice, but this is weird stuff.
And then I started using editors that understood it.
It's like, okay, well I just hit, you know, colon and enter.
And it, it kind of does it for me automatically.
And sure.
There's three spaces, four spaces.
but if I have backspace, then it goes back forward.
It kind of treats the structure.
It knows, the tools know the structure
and it makes it really nice.
And at the time, this is long ago,
I was doing C#, which is an okay language, it's pretty good.
But it has all the symbols and formulas
and all the angle brackets
and all the stuff that you would do, right?
It's not quite C++, but it's pretty close.
And when I came to Python, I was like,
"Gosh, it's just weird that a lot of that stuff's not here."
And it seemed kind of out of place.
But then when I went back, I realized,
"Wait, these languages are lying to me.
They're saying I need all these symbols
to make it hold together, and you just don't."
And it's so much nicer to look at code
that is not laden with these support structures.
So a bit of a diversion, but yeah,
I reacted weirdly to it.
But after about a week, I'm like, "But it's better."
It really is, even though I'm still weirded out by it,
it's better.
And then, you know, pretty quickly I'm like,
yeah, this is sweet, I'm going with this.
- Yeah, same here.
- Yeah, indeed.
All right, well, let's start,
I guess start at the top with your article.
What inspired you, by the way, to write it right now?
'Cause it's pretty recent, isn't it?
- Yeah, that's a good question.
It's not the first time I've been writing content
about clean code and stuff.
In 2016, I actually did a formal certification
building maintainable software from the SIG group,
software improvement group.
They have formal certifications.
And yeah, it's a passion of mine, clean code.
It's also coming back a lot in the coaching
I do day to day helping people.
So it's not the first content piece,
But I think this one kind of summarizes
in a bit more of a concise way.
And of course there's way much more to it,
but I think the 10 points here get you pretty far.
Those are pretty important.
- Yeah, they sure are.
So let's start with one that you already kind of
laid this out, like so many of these techniques,
they are like, they sound so simple.
And like, yeah, sure.
Obviously, Michael, I wouldn't write off.
I wouldn't write a 1000 line function.
And you're like, but it's already 700.
What is how, how did this happen?
Right?
How do we get here?
And the first one solidly falls into that realm
which is smaller units, smaller functions,
smaller classes, smaller modules,
single responsibility principle, all that, right?
Tell us about this.
- Yeah. So indeed a function or a unit of code
should ideally do one thing.
And just a side note, right?
That's usually not how we start.
Sometimes I do want to make this side note
that when we are figuring out a design,
it can definitely happen that you have very large units
because you're basically trying to figure out
what you're building, right?
And that's where refactoring comes in,
but we'll talk about that a bit later.
But yeah, I give a very simple example in this article,
right, where a function parses a CSV file,
builds up a result list and also prints it out, right?
So now this function is doing three things.
And it probably works and it's fine,
but you cannot really easily reuse something
that's doing three things, right?
So if you wanna plug in this function now
into something else, there's a lot of things happening
that probably doesn't make it a candidate to reuse
in its current shape or form.
It's also harder to test because now you have to test
parsing and printing.
And this is kind of a silly example,
but just think about another thing you have in your code
that's doing multiple things.
It will just be harder to test
because there's a lot more going on.
And yeah, as you said, right,
these things sound very intuitive and easy to grasp.
Yet, when we look at code bases, right,
this happens all the time.
And yeah, so if something's harder to test,
it's harder to guarantee that it works.
If it's hard to extend, then when requirements change,
So it'll be harder to update.
- Yeah, it's harder to maintain.
It's harder to reason about the more things that it's doing,
the more state that it might be changing.
It's harder to onboard new people.
It's just the whole spectrum, right?
And it's write functions that are 10 lines long,
not a hundred lines long.
Now, I don't know how,
I like to hear your thoughts on this,
but my feeling about all of this stuff is
as a general rule, this is what you should do.
There will be situations where you might,
you know, this is just, I can't think of something better
or it's way over the top to try to like adhere
to all of these rules within this small context.
I could tell you like on the Talk Python training website,
there's a couple of places where it's like 75, 80, 90 lines
of code for a single function.
I was like, this is just so bad.
I just, I wish it wasn't like this,
But it's just weirdly unique.
But there's 19,000 other lines of code
that are all three lines, five lines type of thing.
So for me at least, this isn't a 100%
or you're doing it wrong.
It's a 98% or 95% of the time, you should be doing this.
And maybe some weird case.
And how do you feel about that in general on these topics?
- Yeah, as I said before,
sometimes you just don't get the design right from the start.
So inevitably, you're going to write some longer classes
or functions.
But then when you break them out in smaller units,
the other thing I have to say about that is it
gives you an opportunity to better document.
Because in this example, if you break this long function that's
doing three things out into three separate functions,
parse CSV, build up list, bad name,
but you get the point and print results.
Then all of a sudden we have three units now
and every unit has a name.
Hence when you go back after a year and look at that code,
which always happens and you always wonder,
what the heck was I thinking?
Now you at a glance,
just by looking at the function numbers,
you have just already a better idea.
These functions you can give doc strings as well.
So at a glance, you have just a much easier time
figuring out what this was about.
- First piece here, which I didn't expect,
but what are my rules?
You know, and I see in this article,
you referenced Martin Fowler's refactoring book.
And one of the most important things that came out of that
is not all the refactorings,
but this idea of code smells, right?
And maybe tell people real quick about code smells.
- Yeah, that's a funny name, right?
- It is. - A code that is smelling
and it's an analogy they came up with.
But yeah, basically it's code
that's not following these best practices
and it's just not maintainable,
not easy to extend,
going back to these principles we mentioned.
So yeah, not following these guidelines,
that code can be smelly,
but it can be as code smell.
Yeah.
- Well, the idea is like, it's not actually not working.
It's just not nice.
You know, you kind of turn your nose up at it
when you see it, but you can't say it's broken
'cause it is working.
But it smells a little bit off, right?
It's not quite broken code, but it's sour, I don't know.
And so the reason I bring this up
is one of my rules of thumb here that I love,
and I think you're kind of hinting that
with this little shout out that you gave me
in this article is,
When we come across these code smells, often,
especially when you're earlier in your career,
often the reaction or the first thought is,
you know, this part is not nice.
This part is complicated.
This part is hard to maintain or hard to understand.
So I need to put a nice comment.
I've been told, "Comment your code, don't be a jerk,
comment it."
So I'm gonna put a big comment that describes
why it's really bad and all that.
And in the code smells sort of world,
these code comments can be seen as deodorant for the smell.
Like it doesn't remove the smell, but it kind of obscures,
like it's not as bad if you saw the comment saying
why the code that follows is bad,
but maybe you could just make it not need a comment.
And a lot of times, like you just said,
that's well, these five lines of code need an explanation
because they're mixed in with all this.
But if they had a function that had a name
whose name was basically the comment,
well, then you don't need a comment
the name is the comment and it's now small and understandable, right? Like there's a lot of these
little iterative things that go on. Exactly, yeah, that's a great point. And it's very easy
to make that refactoring, just turn the comment into a function and we have created another unit
we can extend, we can test, etc. So yeah, it's interesting because there are kind of mixed
feelings about commands. Some people say, "Ferocious, command your code." But mostly in
in the literature I'm reading that commands are actually not that good and sometimes even
labeled as a code smell in the sense that your code should be kind of intuitive.
And yeah, if you cannot express it. - I think it's going back to that,
like half of the time when people are actually putting those comments,
it's because there's something kind of messy and they're trying to help you get over that mess or
deal with that mess rather than just fixing the mess, you know?
- Yeah, it might be an indication of a bad design, right?
- Yes, exactly. - So you might even have
to go back to the drawing board. Yeah. But that said, I definitely see a place for comments where
sometimes you just want to remind yourself and of course your team members not what the code is,
they can read the code obviously, but why you took that decision and there might just be
some extra context that you need to give. Yeah, yeah, absolutely. And it's also different than
and doc strings potentially, right?
Which is kind of a form of a comment,
but it's meant to talk about the API
and not cover up some weird thing
you had to do in the middle.
- Exactly, yeah, doc strings are basically
your API documentation.
- Yeah, exactly.
All right, well, good stuff.
I mean, even GitHub Copilot and those things
are starting to use these comments as a way to say,
well, I'll just make a function
that kind of is named what the comment is.
>> Yeah.
>> Even our robot overlords are going to help us by taking these comments and removing them,
putting the functions there.
>> Help us.
>> Another thing I--
>> Never replace us, right?
>> Yeah, hopefully.
Fingers crossed.
So another thing related to this, strongly related to this, because the more things you
have that are smaller units, you're probably still going to have about the same amount
of codes.
more functions, more classes, more modules,
files and so on.
What gets tricky can be naming them, right?
So choosing good names also, I think probably
is a message in here that people need to think about.
What are your thoughts on that?
- Yeah, it's funny.
Again, another thing that sounds very intuitive,
but it wasn't there saying like there are two
or three complex problems in science.
One other one I can remember in naming things.
- Yeah, there's two problems that are hard
in computer science, naming things,
cache invalidation and off by one errors.
- Thank you.
Yeah, yeah.
So naming is up there, right?
- It is, that's right.
- And I think it goes back again
to knowing your design and what you're building.
And sometimes you don't really have that figured out.
Hence naming becomes more difficult.
But I think that's an experience thing.
you get better at it, the more code you write.
Yeah, maybe we can touch on the magic numbers there.
- Yeah, absolutely.
That's the next one is magic numbers.
And magic, the number part I think is,
could be expanded a little bit broader even,
you know, magic static values, right?
But if you see 360, you know, think just in the code,
like, well, is that a, like a degrees?
- Right. - What is that?
Probably degrees, but it might not be, I don't know.
So yeah, magic numbers, that's your next recommendation.
I'm presuming to avoid them.
- Yes, so when you see some sort of random integer
in the code, which might be an intuitive one,
like 365 number of days in a year,
which we might kind of guess,
but yeah, any guessing in code is not good.
So it's very easy to then replace that 365 integer
with a number on the score of days in a year
or something like that, something that expresses meaning.
Yeah, and again, this is kind of an obvious example,
but if you have some magic five or six or 87 in there,
the reader of this code probably doesn't know
what that means, right?
So if you have a constant uppercase with underscores
as per PEP 8, defined at the top of your module,
I usually put them in the top of the module.
And then in the code, you see like max underscore,
blah, blah, blah, a real name.
And then immediately it makes sense, right?
And it's also a nice way of grouping
those variables in one place.
I said top of the module, but if you have many,
you could also have a constants.py
in your package to group them.
You can also use enums to group various constants together
if they logically pertain to the same group.
- Yeah, enums are a really good recommendation.
- Yeah, enums are a great recommendation
because instead of saying, well, the default Sunday,
so we're just gonna put Sunday here,
like, oh, why Sunday here?
This is weird.
Or you say the function can take a string
when really it can only take seven strings,
seven particular values of string.
You could really clearly communicate that with enums,
which is quite nice.
- Yeah, and the use of constants, that's really a win.
So I'm 100% on board with you on constants.
All caps, maybe snake case, otherwise,
underscores, separate them.
But I have tooling that I work with all the time
that'll say, oh no, you misnamed this variable.
Python, you know they want you to use lowercase variables,
not uppercase variables.
I'm like, but for constants, they say to use uppercase.
Why don't you know this?
It drives me crazy.
So I was thinking about sort of expanding
on this a little bit.
Are you familiar with this, the typing.final?
When was this added in Create?
- I recently discovered this, yes.
Super nice.
- So it's also, the idea is that it comes along
and is meant to be used in this scenario
in addition to what we've already discussed.
So the example in the Python docs says
there's a max size, capital max, capital size.
Instead of just saying it's 9,000,
you say it's colon final 9000. Now, that means nothing to
Python. It means nothing. But it means something to type checkers,
right? So if you have, like my pie or something, and somebody
tries to change the value of it later, it's going to come at
least as a linting type of error, if not a full on runtime
error. So this is something people could leverage to go a
a little bit further.
That's super nice type hinting.
Like as you well paraphrased, it's meaningless to Python.
But if you now run your checker and at C somewhere in your code
that you try to overwrite that variable, which
is perfectly fine, right?
Because Python doesn't enforce--
doesn't say anything if you now would assign a new value
to max size.
But--
There is no context.
--my Python makes up on that final.
Hey, it was final.
Shouldn't overwrite that, so super powerful.
I should use this more.
>> Yeah. You can say final or I would think preferably final of int.
So you say what type it actually is in addition to that.
Now related to this is,
it's not exactly a magic number,
but I often find magic numbers appearing in this situation.
That has to do with,
I want this thing to have maybe a default value or a value that says clearly communicates.
I haven't set a value for it, but I want it to be like in this case a number. It still needs to be
an int. Well, what integer are you going to put there? Zero? Well, zero valid value. Do you want
it to be falsy? Could it be negative? Which negative values? Then you see weird tests like
if it's less than zero, like why is it testing that? Well, that means it's not set. Okay,
That's weird. So another idea that I think comes in that's pretty interesting is the sentinel
pattern where you come up with a particular number and sort of store that and say this
number or value something you say if it is this that means it's unset or it's just a weird case
or it's it's kind of like setting it to none but if that's not going to be a case you can use
Sometimes none is that thing, right?
But not always.
Are you familiar with this?
Do you do anything like this?
- I have not really used it.
So I had to read up on it.
I think I use none quite a bit,
but I think the, I mean, that's at least better
maybe than minus one as defined example at the time.
But I think this even wins by being more explicit even,
right, by having an object than to test against.
- Yeah, so one example of a standard library is
the config parser has a underscore unset
as a global variable and that's its sentinel value.
BZ2 has the underscore sentinel
to just call out the pattern directly there and so on.
My favorite one out of this actually is a variation
is this null object pattern.
So, null, 'cause it comes earlier in the life cycle
of languages where null, not none,
but where a lot of times if you see,
if this value is none, then we can do a thing,
otherwise we can do, actually work with it, right?
And you'll see these tests all over.
And so this pattern is come up with a sentinel value
that is not none, but kind of behaves in a no-op way.
So you could give it a value of a person who is a sentinel
and it just, if you try to get his name,
it's just gonna return, I don't know,
nothing or something like that.
So you can, if it makes sense in that situation,
you can remove a lot of these, if thing is none,
do something else, do something else,
just globally, which is really nice.
- So you don't have to do this non-check here.
So are you saving an if else?
- Yeah, you're saving cyclomatic complexity.
saving like branching at the cost of maybe allocating more stuff or or having it possibly
have this value that doesn't really mean it has a value you know so you got to trade it off and
figure out what it makes. That's interesting because I think I do the is not quite a bit so
yeah I do too because sometimes it's kind of hard to deal with that or you don't control it a lot of
times kind of going back to when I was talking before about the 95 case and I told you about
this really gnarly bit of code, that's because I'm consuming two other APIs that I have no control
over and they're junky. They're real junky. So, you know, I've kind of got to like fit it together
and you don't get a pick whether they use the null object pattern or not. You just got to make it
work, right? Yeah, that's a good point. Yeah, indeed. All right, so those are all kind of under
the magic number category, I would say, even though technically some of them are not, like I said,
but not numbers.
Next up, this one, honestly, I'll tell you,
you asked me about my first experiences with Python long ago.
And this one weirded me out a little bit,
because it's something I had spent a long time in C, C++,
C#, trying to just remove and weed out.
And that's global scope.
Tell us about this and maybe why to watch out for it.
Yeah, so if we leave something in global scope,
for example, we have a global variable,
and we're pulling that into a function with a global keyword,
and we're making changes to it.
Now this function has side effects.
So you have the stuff that's going in the function,
but it's also mutating some external object.
And when you write it, you probably
are very aware of it because you're doing it,
but you're going back, and all of a sudden, this
might bite you.
It will surprise you.
Side effects overall are bad.
And the global scope has that potential
because it's global scope.
It's not local scope to some class or function.
Yeah, basically that it can lead to surprises
and we don't want surprises in code.
- Yeah, and it's not an argument you pass to a function.
It's not a return value from a function.
You might not even know that that is in play
as you interact with part of your code,
but somewhere out there,
something deep down is reaching up and seeing that value.
One of the areas where this comes back, where I think maybe
things might have been different if the people were
able to see the future 30 years in advance, which I'm not
expecting they should be able to,
would be the global interpreter lock itself
with its global description right there.
It's first G. Eric Snow did a lot of work
to try to create a per sub-interpreter lock.
So it's still a global lock, but global for that sub-interpreter
and try to share those within processes.
And I recall I talked about just reworking
hundreds or thousands of global variables
so that they were no longer globally shared,
but were more local.
And it's this kind of stuff that can grow and really
makes it hard to go forward and make changes.
Yeah, interesting.
I think you have had an episode on the GIL
and the refactoring, right?
- Yes, a couple.
I have not had Sam Gross on for his true Gill-less Python
work, but he's welcome anytime he wants to come, of course.
All right, let me see.
I want to make sure I don't skip anything on my list.
So let me just throw this out here for you.
So Global Scope says, look,
you should avoid having global variables.
Sometimes you'll need global variables,
but they shouldn't be the default.
Is there a way you can pass this down to the thing
that needs it, not just make it global and shared.
So minimize what is global, I guess, is one of the things.
When I first thought of that, well,
so Python is full of just a bunch of modules and functions
and the shared state is gonna end up
in these global variables, and that seems really,
oh my gosh, but if you look at languages like Java,
C#, C++, you end up with a lot of static classes.
just because there's a class namespace
between your global variable and not,
they're the same thing.
And so modules and module-level variables are very...
I mean, there's something that you don't want to have too many of,
but they're not as out of whack with the rest of programming
as I think maybe people might initially see them are.
There's no real difference between a static class
and a function and a global variable and a module.
because they are scoped to that module, right?
So unless you bring in that module,
you don't have access to it, you mean?
- Yeah, exactly.
And if you have a class and it has one value
and you have a module has one value,
it's really semantics on whether they're different.
So I don't feel like putting them in,
some languages, maybe things that I go,
well, we don't have that because we have classes
and we put stuff in class.
If they're static classes, so the same thing.
- Yeah, sometimes what confuses people though
is having a static method or just a plain function outside of the class. And I've been
a long-time proponent of just a function, but I did see a Raymond Hettinger talk where he showed
that if you do now, if you have the static method, so you bring basically the function in the class
without it handling the instance, it does show it as part of your API. So if you now do a dur on an
an instance of that class, that static method shows up,
which I found kind of interesting.
- That is interesting, yeah.
I think there's a lot of places where people think,
I need a static class or something,
where it could just be a module with functions
and maybe a global variable or two.
But if you do have classes, and I guess,
and you're trying to look what's part of this class,
then making that, go ahead and bringing that into the class,
that totally makes sense to me, I can see that.
I didn't see that, but that makes sense.
- As a form of grouping.
But yeah, I'm with you with modules and functions,
you can get very far.
- I would say more people err on trying to build up stuff
into a bunch of classes because they've seen that
in other languages they're coming from,
then they don't quite group it right.
You know, like it's more of not idiomatic code,
which I guess we're gonna get to as well
as some of the other stuff.
So one of the things that we kicked off
this conversation with is,
Well, you said we were spoiled.
I take offense to that.
I take offense.
I think it's absolutely fair.
We are so spoiled with the tools we have these days.
I remember pre-internet, it was hard programming.
So pre-web anyway.
So linters, tools that automatically fix things.
That's what's next.
Tell us about those.
- Yeah, this is really a no-brainer in the times we live.
And actually, yeah, we're spoiled
because there was a time I was just manually fixing stuff like eight was giving back.
Until we got a form.
There was a time when we would argue about how it should be fixed.
And we would, this was like a conversation and we'd be like, no, no, no.
We put the commas here and we spaced it like this.
It's like, this really how we should spend our day.
And it was time for somebody to step in and give them, give us some
defaults because I asked the question on Twitter the other day, like single or
double quotes and there are like 50 commands and there's really, yeah, people are really
torn about what the default style should be. But yeah, Flake 8 to be compliant with PEP 8,
which every Python developer should be. Black for auto-formatting. Mypy to do the type checks,
right? As we said before, Python doesn't enforce it, so you need a tool for that. Mypy hence.
And then there's also, Flake 8, for example,
has a lot of plugins we might go into next.
But first I want to highlight, you
want to automate as much as possible.
And a pre-commit tool is just awesome.
It's called pre-commit.
So it's a tool that runs before you try to make a commit.
So it's a great enforcer locally to not commit
any code that's not formatted or that has style violations in it.
Very easy to use, very easy to set up.
It might take a little bit of work fixing.
I mean, black auto formatting is automatic, but maybe you need to fix some flake errors.
But I see that as a little bit of work or a little price to pay with every commit
to avoid a lot of technical debt over time.
One of the challenges I see for a lot of these things and linters and testing,
they're both in this category,
is different people on the team
who all work in the same code base
have very different levels of commitment
to say writing or running unit tests
or formatting your code so that it all looks nice and clean
before they check it in, right?
I mean, I've had experiences where like,
oh, the build is broken again.
It's like, well, why is the build broken again?
Well, someone checked it in.
Why didn't they notice?
because they don't run any of the tools.
Why do they run the tools?
Because they don't really want to run the tools.
Like, OK.
But we're all in this together.
Let's see what-- and tools like the pre-commit stuff
just mean it's just automatic.
There's not a person to be blamed for saying, well,
why didn't you run it?
Or that person makes me run this tool.
Or there's none of that weird friction.
It's just like the software said,
this is what we agreed on, and it's not ready.
you've got to go format this line
or it often will just do that itself, right?
- Yep.
What's the saying?
If it's not automated, it is broken.
(both laughing)
- That's insane.
- This is as simple as putting the YAML in place.
I mean, that's a one-time thing
and that's committed to a version control.
So your collaborator, teammate pulls that in,
you do a pre-commit install,
it installs the hook locally in your .git folder
and you're good to go.
Now all this stuff is enforced.
You can also do that with get up actions,
but I think the more you do locally
at the individual developer level, the better.
- Right, you could do both, right?
- Oh yeah.
- Ideally, none of the malformed code gets checked in
and then fixed, and then it shows up as a git diff
and things like that.
So you could have it on the server just as a safety net,
who knows how that got checked in,
but also have as a pre-commit for most cases.
- Yeah, exactly.
- All right, let's see next up.
Narrow exception blocks.
- Yeah, this is something I see quite a lot
when I'm reviewing code,
is these long blocks between the try and accept.
So 20, 30 lines and my code review command
is always the same.
Are all these lines of code susceptible to this exception?
And of course, often they're not, right?
So narrow your exception blocks,
meaning put only code in the try except
that can actually raise that exception.
- I think it's good advice.
I think it doesn't have to be just one try except block
either for one huge function.
You could have try except do some stuff,
try something else if you really need to,
you can't disambiguate them by exception type.
But also worth pointing out, I suppose,
is the except star stuff, which is,
it's not gonna be Python.
- Oh, that's new, yeah.
- Yeah, that's new, and I don't know how to search for it
'cause it seems like the star, well, whatever,
I can just describe, but it's really interesting
because you can catch multiple exceptions.
And maybe this actually changes the advice a tiny bit.
You can catch multiple exceptions
for something going wrong.
So if you were doing,
probably only around async, but not just.
So you could say,
I'm gonna try to talk to the database and this API.
And if they both break,
you know, the accept star will let you catch both
at two separate executions,
the database exception and the API exception,
potentially, right?
- Right, interesting.
- Yeah, I think that's new, brand new in 3.11.
- Yeah, that's a 3.11 thing.
So it'll be a while till we see that really coming along.
But one of the places that might be relevant
is there's cool libraries like Tenacity,
which say, I wanna call this function,
and if it fails, just wait and call it again.
And then try again, and maybe back off
until too much time has passed,
or give it a certain number of attempts.
But if it failed, but it failed differently three times,
you might wanna know, well,
what are all the ways in which it failed,
not just the last or the first, right?
And with Accept*, you could actually catch
all of those errors,
say from like a retry block or something.
So, I don't know. - Yeah, interesting.
- It doesn't make this cleaner or simpler to go with,
it only complicates it, but still the idea
of like smaller code blocks, I think, good advice there.
- Yeah, and always name your exceptions, right?
So sometimes I see try Accept colon,
and then we're like, what's exception?
Because that will just catch anything, right?
So always be explicit in the exception.
- I think you understand how this works.
When you put that in there,
there's no more errors in the code.
It just keeps running.
It used to crash.
And if I put except colon and just keep going,
way more reliable.
- Yeah.
What's the saying in the Zen of Python?
Errors should not pass silently.
- Yes, exactly.
- And explicit is better than implicit.
- Yeah, I've seen some of this code.
It's not always bad, but it's usually not good.
So yeah, couch the exceptions by specific type,
handle different ones potentially differently and so on.
And maybe that kind of leads us into number six here,
more broadly, that's one of the Pythonic
or idiomatic things of Python, right?
But there's a whole bunch more.
That's your next tip.
- Yeah, this can of course be a whole series of articles
because there's so much what can be considered idiomatic or not.
But yeah, there's sometimes you see people reinventing the wheel,
and they can perfectly well use the standard library.
There's also a very rich set of built-ins, right?
Like all any-- and those built-ins.
But then also style-wise, there's this concept
of leaping, checking before you leap versus just do something
and ask for forgiveness rather than permission.
So for example, code that overly checks if a file exists
or can be opened.
So all these conditionals.
What's often considered more Pythonic
is to just try open a file, try to do something,
and then catch the exception.
So that's why it's called,
it's easier to ask for forgiveness than permission.
- Yeah, yes, exactly.
As opposed to like a C language or something
where you do six or seven checks
to make sure everything is set up just right.
And then, you know,
I'm gonna check that the file is not just the,
and that it has a null terminating character.
Now I'm gonna check that I have access to the files.
You know, if you go and read a lot of C code,
there's like check, check, check, check, check, check,
do the thing.
And usually that's 'cause there's a page fault
and the program just goes, whoof,
and just goes away if you touch it wrong.
Whereas Python almost always, not always,
but almost always the result is,
here's an exception you can catch and handle
and it tells you what went wrong
instead of trying to think of all the checks
'cause there's probably a check you forgot.
Just give it a shot, right?
- Right.
And it's also, it's kind of the positive mindset.
Like usually it works.
And if it doesn't work, we deal with the consequences.
Whereas if you do all these if checks,
that's code that always runs and might not be necessary.
So it might even be faster, right?
- For sure.
So more of the ideas that came to mind
when I was reading your idiomatic code section was just
one use that you did mention this a little bit
about reinforce it is you said, use a standard library.
And one of the things I learned from working with you
is there, you know, sort of,
I would try to pull another library,
other things from PyPI or something.
You're like, look, this is built in, right?
Just, you know what?
You're right, that is built in.
That seems pretty handy, right?
Like for example, Counter, you know,
that's definitely one that I use all the time
because of you.
Yeah, exactly.
So embracing what's there,
instead of maybe getting another library
or just trying to write that algorithm yourself,
'cause who knew it existed?
'Cause I didn't study the standard library enough.
I just came from C and this is how we do it in C.
So I'm gonna try to do that here, right?
Like the enigmatic steps that you can take
are really good there, but also lambdas
versus regular functions for like little inline things.
You mentioned some of the ones that take generators
for like all and any and these other tests.
And there's just a lot of cool little language features
that you'll be glad to use. - Decorators.
- Yeah, yeah, decorators definitely I would put
in that space as well.
- And the with statement,
context managers to automatically clean up resources.
Pretty important feature.
- Another one that is near and dear to my heart,
your number seven on this list.
Near to dear because I have suffered badly
the consequences of choosing wrongly.
Choose the right data structures.
Tell us about that.
- Yeah, this is very important for performance, right?
So where you kind of need to understand
just the fundamentals here, right?
Like list versus sets and dictionaries
and how to perform.
For example, if you're very big collection
of a million items and you would leave that as a list,
yet you want to do searches or lookups,
then how this works is they traverse them item by item,
right?
Where if you'd make that a set,
it's now in big O notation, O1,
because there's hashing going on.
So it can immediately find the value
because they're hashed, right?
So that's a small, well, a pretty fundamental example
because we work with lists and sets
and dictionaries all the time,
but those are very important to know.
- They are.
The dictionary in the set one
just can't emphasize that enough.
I mean, obviously we use dictionaries so much,
but if you've got a list,
but you think you might need to look up stuff in that list
based on, say if it's a list of objects,
some field of that object.
If you were to make that a dictionary,
make the key the field,
and it's not a little bit faster.
It's unbelievably faster.
My mind just never ceases to be amazed.
Like, you know what?
It really, it went through a million items that fast,
like instantly, right?
It's so different.
Or if you see people writing code,
here's some more of the idiomatic stuff is,
I'm looping over a thing,
I want to build up this list of them,
but I want duplicates.
You might see it, if this thing is not,
you know, look in the list for it,
then you can add it, like just don't do that.
Just make a set and just jam it in there
and it'll reject duplicates, right?
Like there's a lot of things where this ties back
to your idiomatic one as well.
- Yeah, another one I highlight there are decks, right?
So when you do inserts and deletes
both ends of a sequence. That's also generally slow with a list for the same reason, because
as the search example is that it needs to remap values massively, and a deck is designed to
do that fast on both ends. So anytime I need to, if it's a big collection and I need to insert stuff
on at the start, then a deck from the collections module is a better choice.
Yeah, absolutely. Another thing I guess, giving a little quick shout out here is the default dict
is really nice too. Oh yeah. For removing tests and checks and initialize just.
Because you don't have to check if a key is in the dictionary, you can just assume it's there.
And then that yeah, that leads, you can ditch a whole bunch of if statements.
Yep, exactly. It's the job of the dictionary, not your job now.
Yeah, nice.
All right, let me see.
Do I have any others that I want to squeeze in here?
OK, so here's one that I wanted to sneak in before we
get further beyond this.
And where's that?
This one?
No.
I don't think I pulled up.
Let me-- I'm not sure why I don't have it pulled up yet.
is to use guarding clauses. And so often what I'll see, especially
when people are new is look writing code that looks like
this. It's like, it looks to me like a saw the lumberjack would
use or something. There's like, zip, zip, zip out, and then back
and then out and then back. And you're like, Whoa, you know,
it's usually like it starts in the middle of the editor window
and it goes to the right. You're like, this is, you know, it's,
It's usually if some case and then if some other case,
maybe do a little step, then if another case.
And it's like assuming that it's got to build up
a bunch of these steps before it can sort of go down
the happy path.
So it's gonna check everything that could possibly go wrong
before it tries to do that.
And I don't know how you feel about guarding clauses.
I love guarding clauses. - I love it.
- Yeah, you do?
So tell people about this sort of alternative.
It's so simple, but it makes such a difference.
Yeah.
It goes back to the Zen of Python again.
Um, flat is better than nested.
So nested deeply nested code is just inherently, it's more complex.
Hence harder to, to maintain.
Um, yeah, it's, it's called the, arrow arrow shape.
I learned from this article that it's also called the staircase, which is nice.
Um, but yeah, you can, if you look up our arrow shape,
that explains more about it.
But yeah, it's just more complex because, yeah, it's, again,
that cyclomatic complexity, right,
the amount of paths you have through your code.
And if you, in this case, reverse all these statements
and early return, the code is now way flatter.
It's easier to read and less complex.
So this code looks really reasonable.
And yeah, the other is just very hard to follow.
You don't even know.
And there's all these weird interplays of, like, well,
if this is true but that's false and could you actually get into that if case whereas
these guarding clauses just say if this is wrong bail out of this function if this
game over yeah like return false or don't do the thing or whatever and then eventually once you've
hit all those with very little indentation then you have the thing you wanted to get to and that
it also kind of makes them a little bit unrelated to each other unlike the the super nested style
- Yeah, I guess, yeah, the cyclomatic complexity, right?
The amount of combinations you can have with this is less,
hence it's less complex, hence it's easier to maintain.
And readability here is way better.
- Yeah, I totally agree.
So when you see things like flat is better than nested
in the Zen of Python, you're like, cool,
but I got to test some stuff, so it's getting nested.
Right, like it's, I just,
there's nothing in that statement that it tells you,
what are the mechanics that you consider to avoid that?
Right, it's just, well, it's complicated.
I'm sorry, it's gonna be nested, right?
It would be better if it weren't, but it is.
Well, not actually, like guarding clauses
almost always will lessen it,
if not really, really decrease it.
- Yeah, that's a good point.
Like the Zen tells you the what, but not necessarily the how.
And the guard clauses, this is a particular technique.
Another one in refactoring is the extract method refactoring.
And that's where we pull out a bunch of code
into a new function, which also often leads
to less nested code.
- Indeed.
Is that your next one, refactoring?
- Could be.
(both laughing)
- I think that was a bonus.
- That's right.
It was a bonus here at the end.
Absolutely.
So that's where you can give a shout out
to the refactoring book,
which also had those code smells in them.
- Totally, yeah.
- Do you still recommend people read that?
I mean, I read it with bated breath in 1999
or whenever that thing came out,
it was really an important book.
And I'm like, this has changed everything.
But you know, that's 2025 years ago,
something like that, when it actually came out.
- Yeah, that's a good point.
I think the tooling has improved,
but still I think conceptually,
this is still an important book.
I was reading parts of it again.
Honestly, I do like the first edition a bit better sometimes
because it uses Java, where it just uses JavaScript
And I don't know the quality, but I think I would, I might actually prefer the Java or the JavaScript to be honest.
But it's very fundamental stuff.
And, yeah, it still has, it's also nice.
That's a catalog, so you don't have to read it end to end.
You can just zoom into parts that are relevant for you at that moment.
So yeah, it's a collection of things.
Yeah.
Okay.
Very interesting.
So I guess another one, I don't remember if it was directly in your article.
I don't think so.
It was just sort of implied throughout was, you know, embrace refactoring.
You opened the, with alluding to this at the beginning of this conversation is I
see a lot of people who get stuck thinking about, I've got to get this right.
I know if I start wrong, I'm going to hate it.
It's going to be hard to work on.
It's going to be so bad.
And so I got to sit here and think for like two weeks to get started on this project.
So I get it right.
You know what you could also do?
Just pick one way that seems right at the time.
Spend a week on it.
If it's not working, it'll refactor to the other or even throw it away and go the other
option.
Right?
Like there's a lot of people kind of stuck.
And I think embracing the idea of refactoring, maybe not in the traditional by hand effect
of Martin Fowler's original book,
but we have tools that do a lot of this automatically
or almost automatically, right-click and ask it to.
So what are your thoughts?
I definitely think people should at least catch the zen
of it, if not go through the book
'cause the tools will take care of it.
- Yeah, you still wanna know the concepts here,
the different techniques as I already highlighted,
the extract method, for example,
grouping constants into enums we have mentioned before.
So a lot of actually what we've spoken about so far
can be found in this book as well.
And I think overall the goal of refactoring
is to keep that technical depth in check.
So avoid software rot, they also say.
And yeah, as you start to add more code
and cover more scenarios and the always changing
requirements inevitably what happens.
- You just learn, you thought it was one thing,
but as you got further into it, you're like,
you know, that part is actually,
that's where the problem is.
I didn't think so, but now I know,
'cause that's where it's hard, right?
- Which you only learn as you go, right?
Yeah, that's a good point.
- But the people who are stuck,
I don't think they internalize that,
like the only way to know where you're gonna get stuck
further down the road is to go down the road.
You can't think about it very well.
There are a couple of interesting comments here.
With respect to guarding clauses,
Alvaro says, you could go and put search statements
at the beginning of functions to indicate
some of the assumptions that could be disabled in production
and give nice errors on pytest.
So pytest, rather.
Yeah, possible.
What do you think, Bob?
Yeah, asserts are great.
But yeah, I'm happy that you highlight the caveat
that they can be disabled, so you cannot always rely on them.
But yeah, I definitely see a place for asserts.
And of course, you use them in pytest all the time
to assert different ways your function performs.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
So I use most my asserts in pytest.
Yeah.
But I can definitely see a place for this scenario
that Alvaro highlights.
And then Brendan at Lottie has a very realistic problem
that people run into is, I worked a lot of places
where they don't give you the time to do the refactoring
and make things better.
And so it just builds up until it becomes not ideal,
as his second comment here implies.
So--
>>That's a good point.
>>That is a real problem.
And I'll tell you how I solved it.
Bob, maybe we're getting short on time,
but you can tell me real quick how you solved it.
For me, when my managers and folks would say,
Michael, what is your estimate
for how long this is gonna take?
If I thought it was gonna take five hours,
but maybe I would need to do an hour or two of refactoring,
this feature took seven hours.
Like, you want it done, it's gonna take seven hours.
Because if I'm gonna do it, I'm gonna do it right,
'cause I'm gonna have to work on it afterwards,
and I know it's just gonna get worse if I...
So I wouldn't exactly lie to them,
but I would, I would include the time to make it right.
Not just make it work.
As maybe even double it, right.
Because, there's the initial version and there's the testing, there's the
documentation, there are, bug fixes there.
Inevitably our requirement changes, in the sprint meetings.
So it might, five hours might just be that initial draft almost, but
maybe it should then be 10 hours.
Yeah.
Perhaps.
But whatever it is, clean code should be part of the deliverable, in my opinion.
And it should be part of the estimate.
>> I was going to say, estimate times three plus two weeks.
That's a nice one.
>> Exactly.
That is a good one.
Very good.
All right.
Well, we're getting short on time here.
Let me do some -- I want to do some of this kind of different bomb,
because I think this is actually -- let me share everything here.
I think that this is something people are going to have to start thinking about as well
as maybe an option here.
So what about asking AI assistants, things like Google Copilot or Chat GP?
I think there might be some cases where people say, "Here's my code.
Hey, thing, could you make it better?"
So for example, let's do this to close out the show, okay, Bob?
How can we write clean code in Python?
I'm gonna ask chat GP.
We have already covered this.
- Are we sharing?
All right.
- Oh, hold on.
I thought so.
I did, I forgot to add a stream.
So I'm gonna ask chat GP here.
And what else does it say?
So I gave it all of your tips and I said,
we already discussed that.
What else can we do?
- Is it based in the article as well?
- No, I didn't give it the article.
just the headings.
So it says you can document your code,
keep it simple, which it didn't understand,
follow PEP 8.
This is an interesting one.
Exceptions are for error handling.
So anyway, I just thought it might be kind of fun
to think about, you know,
could we ask these things to help us and improve our code?
I don't know if you played with any of this, but it.
- I have not yet.
That's Julian's department.
He's geeking out over the tool, but I'm...
I have it on my, high on my list to try it out
because it's really mind blowing what this tool is doing.
Yeah.
- It is.
I, you know, I had a program that I wrote
and just see if I can go to,
I'll just grab some random gist here on GitHub.
Let's see.
Here we go.
We'll grab this one.
So you can take these things, this random code,
and say things like, here's a Python program.
How can I make it more readable?
And you can give it this long thing.
And it'll say, look, there are no doc strings.
There's some places where you had meaningful variables
are missing.
You could have grouped the imports better.
could add more type hints, and then it rewrites it.
So for example, this is my code to integrate with turnstile.
And so you see it putting type hints and stuff as it goes.
Typing there, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So anyway, I don't know.
I feel like this is-- as much as looking back 25 years
and seeing refactoring go, that's seminal,
maybe this kind of stuff is going
to have to be something that we take into consideration
going forward.
- Yeah, wow, pretty impressive.
- Yeah, we will see, we will see.
So anyway, that was fun, but let's close it out.
- Yeah.
- Excellent work.
I mean, I feel like we only just touched the surface, right?
This could go on and on.
JF out in the audience asked about unit testing
and we barely touched on that.
So, but there's a bunch of more areas,
but I think we're out of time.
- Yeah, I mean, it's a whole field.
- This stuff is coming up in your world, I can see.
- Thousand page or books have been written about this.
It's a whole field.
So yeah, we mentioned a couple of important things, I think.
- Yeah, we sure did.
Well, it's certainly a lot of things that people can take
and they do sound simple, like,
well, write smaller programs and give them good names
or write smaller parts of your program
and give it good names.
But that it's like a never ending journey to do that right
and to keep on it, right?
So I think-
- There's a lot of nuance as well, right?
- There is, absolutely.
All right, well, quick two final questions
before you get out of here.
You're gonna write some clean Python code.
What editor would you use these days?
- Well, the coaches, the team almost had me on VS Code
which is an amazing idea,
But it was not as super fast, of course.
But for me, for my workflow, it was not as fast as Vim.
So I stuck with Vim, and I do everything.
It's just the setup, right, with all the plugins
and shortcuts, and it makes me fast.
And it's very hard to change.
- Yeah, it's one of those things where,
you know, you could change to something potentially,
but how long are you gonna be in a degraded state
of working before you gain enough experience?
And will it actually be that much better?
You know, there's a lot to it, right?
- And once the tool introduces a mouse
and I have the other option of only using a keyboard
then it's still the keyword.
- Yeah, for sure.
Okay, and the notable PyPI package come across lately?
- Yeah, this is such a hard question.
I think I've mentioned requests in the past.
These days there's HTTPX
because we're using a lot of code to consume APIs
and now you can do that synchronously.
But now maybe the shout is really for Sebastian Ramirez,
SQL model, FastAPI, Typer.
Apart from amazing tools, the documentation,
it's so pleasant.
I keep going back and because I teach those tools as well,
right, to other developers,
I can just teach them from the documentation.
It's really good with solid code samples.
So yeah, FastAPI, I guess it is then.
- Right on, and all those things you named there,
an important piece in the mix are Python types and Pydantic.
So. - Yeah, exactly.
Exactly, that really took the type hints to the next level.
- It did. - Yeah.
- It definitely did.
All right, well, final call to action.
People are interested in this.
Maybe they're interested in getting to know
some of your coaching stuff better as well.
What are you telling them?
- Yeah, go to pybit.es, our website.
check out our PDM program.
And yeah, for anything you can also join the PyBot Slack,
hit me up there with any questions or comments
on PyBob, @pybob there.
And I think that's it.
- Hi Bob.
- Yeah.
- That's a good name, I like it.
- So my handle.
- Yeah, perfect.
So people can go check it out there.
And you've got the cool aspects
of the Spanish domain suffix.
So pybit.es, you can actually have just the word.
That's very cool.
- Yeah.
- Excellent.
All right, well, thank you for being on the show.
Thanks for writing the article
and good to catch up with you as always.
- Yeah, thanks for having me.
This was so much fun.
I was happy to share.
- You bet.